The Indus Valley Civilization (IVC) is one of the four ancient civilizations of the world and is also claimed to be the largest
among all. Around 3000 BC, the sites of Indus Valley Civilization emerged on the banks of the river Indus & they flourished
between 2600 BC to 1900 BC. It belonged to the bronze age and proved to be far more advanced in bronze-using culture.

You can also register for the best coaching for history optional and begin your UPSC IAS preparation journey with Testbook.

The civilization mainly covered Sindh, Balochistan, Punjab, Gujarat, Rajasthan and northern Uttar Pradesh. In total, the
area of civilization accounted for approximately 1.3 million square kilometres.

In 1921, the Archaeological Department of India unearthed the first site of the Indus Valley Civilization and it is known
as Harappa. Since then the civilization itself is referred to as the Harappan Civilization.

In the following years, several sites of the Indus Valley Civilization were discovered by various archaeologists. In
addition, numerous sculptures, jewellery, seals, potteries and so on which display the artistic sensibilities and vivid
imagination of the people belonging to the Indus Valley Civilization have also been excavated from these sites since
1921.

In this article on the major sites of the Indus valley civilization, we shall discuss some of the important Harappan sites, their
location, the archaeologist behind their excavation and the important archaeological findings in these sites. This topic will be
very helpful for UPSC aspirants in their upcoming preliminary examinations.

Also, check out the article on the Vedic Age here.

Download Major Sites Of Indus Valley Civilization for UPSC Exam in
PDF here

UPSC Coaching with India's Super Teachers

Get 12 + 4 Months SuperCoaching @ just
TER990 227199
= Your Total Savings 342800

Explore SuperCoaching

Want to know more about this Super Coaching ?

Download Brochure

Important Sites Of Indus Valley Civilization

More than 1000 sites of the Indus Valley Civilization have been unearthed in various regions of India, Pakistan and Afghanistan.
India is home to the majority of the sites of this thousand-year-old civilization. Let us discuss a few major sites of the Indus
Valley Civilization one by one.

There are seven important cities in the Indus valley civilization

Mohanjodaro
Harappa
Kalibangan
Lothal
Chanhudaru

. Dholavira
Banawali

0

They are explained in detail below.

Harappa

Harappa was the first excavated/ discovered site of the Indus Valley Civilization. It was excavated by a team led by the
archaeologist Daya Ram Sahni in 1921 and the most important Indus Valley Civilization sites.

It is located in the Sahiwal district of West Punjab, on the banks of River Ravi.

This city was possibly an urban centre of the Indus Valley Civilization.
Major archaeological findings which have been unearthed from Harappa

Two sandstone statues depicting human anatomy
Ekkas (Bullock carts)
Two rows of six Granaries

workmen quarters
Bronze sculpture of a dog chasing a deer
Red sandstone male torso

Sculpture of mother goddess

Pottery with an Indus script on it.
Faience slag

°

Terracotta figurines

o

Check NCERT Notes on Ashoka’s Edicts here.

Mohenjo Daro

Mohenjo Daro was the second site to be unearthed from the area of the Indus Valley Civilization. It was discovered by
R.D. Banerjee and his team in 1922and is one of the most important Indus Valley Civilization sites.

It is located in the Larkana district of Sindh (Pakistan) on the banks of the river Indus.

Most of the unicorn seals belonging to the Harappan Civilization have been discovered in Mohenjo Daro.
Major archaeological findings of Mohenjo Daro

The great bath

Citadel

Bronze statue of dancing girl

Bronze buffalo

Steatite statue of a bearded priest

Seal of Pashupati

The great granary

Assembly hall

3 cylindrical-shaped seals similar to Mesopotamian ones.
Terracotta toys

A piece of woven cloth

0

Study Indian History Timeline here.

Sutkagendor

In 1929, one of the sites of the Indus Valley Civilization, Sutkagendor was excavated by a Flint blades archaeologist
named Stein.

This Harappan site is located in the Makran district of Balochistan (Pakistan), on the banks of Dast river. As of now, it is
the westernmost site of the Indus Valley Civilization that is known.

Like most of the Harappan sites, Sutkagendor also has a citadel and defensive wall which is about 30 feet wide.
Archaeologists believe that this Harappan site would have been on the trade route from Lothal to Mesopotamia.

MMainr archacsnlaagical indinace nneaarthoad fram SntlFacandanr
STEERER REA AAR TE mts ASAE Em TAREE A RAR AE Af TARE AT RR RAAT Tem ARETE

Stone vessels

o

Pottery
Shell beads and

©
o

Bangles are made out of clay.

©

Read the NCERT Notes Buddhist Councils and Texts here.

Chanhudaro

In 1931, the Harappan site called Chanhudaro was excavated by N.G. Majumdar and his team.

This site is located in the Nawabshah district of Sindh (Pakistan) on the bank of the river Indus. It is located 80 miles
south of Mohenjo Daro.

From the archaeological findings of this site, it can be inferred that this city was the manufacturing centre of the Indus
Valley Civilization and it was possibly an abandoned city.

This site is portrayed as the Lancashire of ancient India and it is the only Indus city which does not have any citadel in it

o

Archaeological findings from Chanhudaro

Traces of bead maker’s factory
The usage of kajal and lipstick was discovered
Inkpot

Impression of a cart with a seated driver

Lothal

Archaeologist R.Rao unearthed the Lothal city, an important Indus Valley Civilization site in 1953.
It is located near the Gulf of Cambay/ Gulf of Khambhat in Gujarat, on the bank of river Sabarmati.

One of the important features of this Harappan site is that it consists of a dock which is regarded as the oldest one in the
country. This dock connects the city to the Arabian sea via the Sabarmati river. This made the city an important trade
centre of the entire civilization.

Archaeologists and historians claim that Lothal was possibly the Manchester of the Harappan civilization.

It is the most extensively researched coastal site of the Indus Valley Civilization.
Archaeological findings from Lothal

Port and dockyard
Single citadel
An exclusive feature of lothal is that it has a house with an entrance facing the street

Couple burial
The seal with the story of a clever tox
Mesopotamian seal made of ivory
Rice husk

Chess game

°

Terracotta figures of horse and ship

0

Also, check out the West Flowing Rivers of India here.

Kalibangan

In 1953, Kalibanhan city of the Indus Valley Civilization was excavated by Amala Nanda Gosh.

It is located in the Hanumangarh district of Rajasthan, on the banks of river Ghaggar. This river is believed to be the
remnant of the ancient river Sarasvathi.

The archaeologists claim that the ploughed fields of Kalibangan are the world’s first ploughed fields.

°

Things that were unearthed from Kalibangan city

Double citadel

Burnt bangles

Fire altars

Sun-dried bricks
Ploughed fields
Wooden plough
Bones of camel
Lower fortified town
Earthquake evidence
. Copper ox

Small circular pits with large urns and pottery

o

Also check: King Harshavardhana here

Surkotada

J.P.Joshi 1964 excavated the Surkotada site of the Indus Valley Civilization.
It is located in the Kutch district of Gujarat on the banks of the Shadi Kaur river.
Harappan made a settlement in this IVC site only during the later phase of the Harappan civilization 1.e between 1900 BC
to 1300 BC.

It is the only Harappan site where the actual remains of horse bones were found.

It is a fortified Harappan site which covers an area of about 3.5 acres. On the East side of the city, residential complexes
were constructed and on the west side, Citadel was located. Citadels were located higher than the residential complexes.

Major archaeological findings from Surkotada

Horse, elephant and wolf bones

Stone fortifications.

Go through the NCERT Notes on Mauryvan Administration here.

Banawali

Banawali is one of the important archaeological sites of the Indus Valley Civilization which was unearthed by R.S.Bisht
in 1974.

It is located in the Fatehabad district of Haryana. It is located about 120km to the northeast of Kalibangan.

The city consists of a well-constructed fort town with a defence wall of a height of 4.5m. Burnt and moulded brick kilns
were used to construct the houses.

The pottery recovered from the IVC site, Banawali is very similar to that of Kalibangan in the assemblage.

©

The artefacts unearthed from Banawali

Barley grains of good quality

Toy plough

The settlement was oval shaped

Burnished grayware which were decorated with motifs
Ivory comb

Tortoiseshell

Human figures of both males and females

S-shaped jars, painted earthen pots, cooking vessels etc.

Rakhigarhi

The excavation of this Indus Valley Civilization site began only in 1963.
It is located in the Hisar district of Haryana.

The excavation of this site has revealed that Rakhigarhi was one of the well-planned cities of the Harappan civilization. It
consists of roads and an urbanised sewage system.

This IVC site appears to be as large as Harappa and Mohenjo Daro. The Global Heritage Fund considers Rakhigarhi as
one of the oldest as well as the largest site of the Indus Valley Civilization.
‘1he pottery of RakKhigarhi 1s similar to that of Kalibangan and banawali.
Major archaeological findings at Rakhigarhi

Bronze toys

0

Terracotta statues

°

Granary with 7 rectangular chambers. (It dates back to the mature Harappan phase i.e. 2600 BCE to 2000 BCE).

0

Traces of cotton cloth on silver and bronze artefacts

°

Take a look at the NCERT Books for UPSC Exam here.

Dholavira

Dholavira was first discovered in 1967 and was excavated by R.S. Bisht in 1985. It is one of the largest sites of the Indus
Valley Civilization.

It is located in the Kutch district of Gujarat.

Recently, in 2014, a step well was discovered from this Harappan site. It was thrice the size of the Great Bath of Mohenjo
Daro.

Various reservoirs have been found during the excavations. It can be inferred that an advanced water management system
was employed in the Harappan cities.

The entire city was divided into three parts — citadel, middle town and lower town. It is the only Harappan site with such
a division. The plan of the city was a parallelogram.

Some of the major artefacts excavated from Dholavira

Signboard

Large water reservoirs and embankments

Dams

A figure of a chariot tied to a pair of bullocks was driven by nude men.

Usage of rocks in construction.

Amri

It was discovered in 1935 by NG Majumdar.
It is located in the Dadu district of Sindh, Pakistan on the banks of the Indus river.

It has evidences of Antelopes and Rhinoceros.

Also, read National Commission for Scheduled Castes here.
Other Major Sites Of the Indus Valley Civilization

A few other prominent sites of the Indus Valley Civilization are listed below:

Indus Valley Civilization Sites Location

Amri Located in the Dadu district of Sindh, Pakistan
Alamgirpur Located in the Meerut district of Uttar Pradesh, India.
Balu Located in the Kaithal district of Haryana, India

Balathal Located in the Udaipur district of Rajasthan, India
Daimabad Located in the Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra, India.
Desalpur Located in the Kutch district of Gujarat, India

Ganeriwala Located in West Punjab, Pakistan

Karanpura Located in the Hanumangarh district of Rajasthan, India
Kunal Located in the Fatehabad district of Haryana, India

Kot Diji Located in the Khairpur district of Sindh, Pakistan

Kot Bala Located in the Lasbela district of Balochistan, Pakistan.
Mehrgarh Located in the Kachi district of Balochistan, Pakistan
Mandi Located in the Muzaffarnagar district of Uttar Pradesh, India
Pabumath Located in the Kutch District of Gujarat, India.

Rangpur Located in the Ahmedabad district of Gujarat, India
Ropar Located in the Rupnagar district of Punjab, India

Sanauli Located in the Baghpat district of Uttar Pradesh, India
Shikarpur Located in the Kutch district of Gujarat, India

Also, check the Difference between Indian and Islamic style architecture here.

lestbook 1s an e-learning platform which has helped 100Us oT aspirants to clear competitive exams. Mock tests, quizzes, NCERT
notes, static notes and much more curated by the Testbook experts are available in our android application. You can check out
our UPSC Online Coaching, and download the Testbook App now to check out various other topics relevant to the UPSC IAS
Exam.

Rigadtvw arp as EH uw ive

Also, check the Related Ancient History Articles for UPSC in the table below:

Satavahana Dynasty Chalukya Dynasty
Gupta Empire Sunga Dynasty
Vakataka Dynasty Pallava Dynasty

More Articles for TAS Preparation

>» Ayushman Bharat

o» TLvpes Of Majorities In The Indian Parliament

» Amendments In Indian Constitution

» Preamble Of The Indian Constitution

» Major Features Of The Constitution

>» Scheduled Tribes Pvtgs
J» Pds And Tpds

» Moplah Rebellion 1921

» Mgnrega Mahatma Gandhi Rural Employment Guarantee Act

» Wind And Wind Types

Report An Error

[D) testbook

The Complete Exam Preparation
Platform

Free 20000+ 15000+ MockTest ® Free 2000+ Video
Practice Questions & Quizzes Lessons & PDF Notes

Download the App From

START LEARNING

et mom
Google Play
